DOCSP-42767 Aggregation (#57)
mongodb/docs-mongoid: source/aggregation.txt

.. _mongoid-aggregation:

====================================
Transform Your Data with Aggregation
====================================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: code example, transform, pipeline

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none

>    :depth: 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :depth: 2
```

   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use {+odm+} to perform **aggregation
operations**.

Aggregation operations process data in your MongoDB collections and return
computed results. The MongoDB Aggregation framework, which is part of the Query
API, is modeled on the concept of data processing pipelines. Documents enter a
pipeline that contains one or more stages, and this pipeline transforms the
documents into an aggregated result. 

> An aggregation operation is similar to a car factory. A car factory has an assembly line, which contains assembly stations with specialized tools to do specific jobs, like drills and welders. Raw parts enter the factory, and then the assembly line transforms and assembles them into a finished product.

Reviewer: S: newline this paragraph

Author: Changed this to the Rust version

> An aggregation operation is similar to a car factory. A car factory has an assembly line, which contains assembly stations with specialized tools to do specific jobs, like drills and welders. Raw parts enter the factory, and then the assembly line transforms and assembles them into a finished product.

Reviewer: S: I think the Rust docs present this info and the next section more cleanly https://github.com/mongodb/docs-rust/blob/master/source/fundamentals/aggregation.txt

- Select which documents to return
- Select which fields to return
- Sort the results

You can use aggregation operations to perform the following actions:

- Run find operations
- Rename fields
- Summarize data
- Group values

{+odm+} Builders
----------------

You can construct an aggregation pipeline by using {+odm+}'s high-level
domain-specific language (DSL). The DSL supports the following aggregation
pipeline operators:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 50 50
    
   * - Operator
     - Method Name
   
   * - :manual:`$group <reference/operator/aggregation/group/>`
     - ``group()``

   * - :manual:`$project <reference/operator/aggregation/project/>`
     - ``project()``

   * - :manual:`$unwind <reference/operator/aggregation/unwind/>`
     - ``unwind()``

To create an aggregation pipeline by using one of the preceding operators, call
the corresponding method on an instance of ``Criteria``. Calling the method adds
the aggregation operation to the ``pipeline`` atrritbure of the ``Criteria``
instance. To run the aggregation pipeline, pass the ``pipeline`` attribute value
to the ``Collection#aggregate()`` method. 

Example
~~~~~~~

> Consider a collection that contains documents that are modeled as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider a database that contains collection with documents that are modeled by the following classes:
```

.. code-block:: ruby

   class Tour
     include Mongoid::Document

     embeds_many :participants

     field :name, type: String
     field :states, type: Array
   end

   class Participant
     include Mongoid::Document

     embedded_in :tour

     field :name, type: String
   end

> 

Reviewer: S: add a sentence that describes the interpretation of this document set

The following example creates an aggregation pipeline that outputs the states a
participant has visited by using the following
aggregation operations:

> - ``$match``, which find documents in which the ``participants.name`` field
>   value is ``"Serenity"``
> - ``$unwind``, which deconstructs the ``states`` array field and outputs a
>   document for each element in the array
> - ``$group``, which groups the documents by the value of their ``states`` field
> - ``$project``, which prompts the pipeline to return only the ``_id`` and
>   ``states`` fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``match()``, which matches documents in which the ``participants.name`` field
  value is ``"Serenity"``
- ``unwind()``, which deconstructs the ``states`` array field and outputs a
  document for each element in the array
- ``group()``, which groups the documents by the value of their ``states`` field
- ``project()``, which prompts the pipeline to return only the ``_id`` and
  ``states`` fields
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/aggregation/builder-dsl.rb
   :language: ruby

Aggregation with the Ruby Driver
--------------------------------

> You can use the Ruby driver to run aggregation operations that do not have

Reviewer: S: use source constant 
```suggestion
You can use the {+ruby-driver+} to run aggregation operations that do not have
```

corresponding builder methods by using the
``Collection#aggregate()`` method and passing in an array of aggregation

> operations. Creating the aggregation pipeline by using the Ruby driver returns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operations. Using the {+ruby-driver+} to perform the aggregation returns
```

raw ``BSON::Document`` objects rather than ``Mongoid::Document`` model
instances.

Example
~~~~~~~

> Consider a collection that contains documents that are modeled as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider a database that contains collection with documents that are modeled by the following classes:
```

.. code-block:: ruby
    
   class Band
     include Mongoid::Document
     has_many :tours
     has_many :awards
     field :name, type: String
   end

   class Tour
     include Mongoid::Document
     belongs_to :band
     field :year, type: Integer
   end

   class Award
     include Mongoid::Document
     belongs_to :band
     field :name, type: String
   end

> The following example creates an aggregation pipeline to retrieve all bands that
> have toured since 2000 and have at least one award:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example creates an aggregation pipeline to retrieve all bands that
have toured since ``2000`` and have at least ``1`` award:
```
